          Chain Link Cantilever Gate Installation Manual




Introduction to Cantilever Gates:
A cantilever gate is unique in that it 'cantilevers' itself to close an opening while being supported from only one end.
Cantilever gates move in a linear motion, or straight line, without requiring any lateral space as a swing gate would
require. Due to its cantilevered design, these gates are typically built larger in width than the opening they are designed
to close; this allows a portion of the gate to remain outside of the opening, often unobtrusively behind the adjacent fence
line. This portion of the gate is called the counterbalance.

The gate counter balance should be 1/2 the length of the gate opening. Minimum counter balance should be 4' long. If
an automatic operator is to be installed, the counter balance may need to be longer so the operator can 'pull' the gate
shut by the rear of the counter balance. Always choose the operator and gate before construction begins.
Traditionally, a cantilever gate is 'sandwiched' between two top rollers and two bottom rollers and mounted on two posts
as shown above. A leading edge wheel is not required in most cases due to its cantilevered design. Another type of
hardware system other than gate rollers may be employed. One such system employs a track which is mounted near
the top of the gate between roller posts. The gate hangs suspended from the track with trolleys. There are guide rollers
mounted to the bottom of the roller posts which prevent the bottom portion of the gate from being pulled away from the
posts.

A cantilever gate should not be confused with other types of slide gates such as 'V-groove type track gates', 'overhead
gates', or 'rolling gates' as they are often called. These type gates have a track in the gate opening and/or a leading
edge wheel attached to the latch side of the gate which rides on the ground. A V-groove type track gate has an inverted
piece of angle iron imbedded in the drive on which a specially notched wheel attached to the gate frame can ride. An
overhead gate usually hangs suspended by trolleys with steel bracing, truss rods, and truss cables from an overhead I-
beam which extends over the gate opening. Lastly, a rolling gate typically has a pipe track mounted to the adjacent
fence on which the back portion of the gate may ride with a pipe track rear wheel. A leading edge wheel is mounted to
the latch side of the gate which simply rolls on the ground.
                             Property of Hoover Fence Company - Copyright Hoover Enterprises, Inc.
               Contents of this catalog may not be reproduced without written permission by Hoover Fence Co.
                            For comments or questions see support.hooverfence.com       Rev: 7/10                       1
Cantilever Gate Construction:
The vertical bracing should be spaced 4 to 6' apart. If 2-1/2" sch. 40 pipe or comparable is used 5' spacing is adequate.
The rollers ride on the horizontal outside frame. Support for the top and bottom of the frame is essential. Only the 'open-
ing' portion of the gate is stretched with chain link, or need fascia applied. The counterbalance usually slides behind a
fence line and is designed for structural integrity only.

Post sizes are important. In general, chain link cantilever gates require 3" O.D. (outside diameter) roller posts for widths
up to 10' opening size. Use 4" O.D. posts up to 20' and 6 5/8" O.D. posts up to 32'. These specifications are for 6' high
gates and shorter. For taller gates increase post sizes at each step and use 8 5/8" O.D. posts for 32' gates.


Concrete footers need to be significant. 18" diameter x 42" deep is recommended for 3-4" O.D. posts, 24" diameter x
42" for 6 5/8" O.D. posts and 30" diameter x 48" for 8 5/8" O.D. posts. Increase bottom diameters 6"; creating a bell
shaped hole. The up and down stress with these type gates will 'work' even the largest posts out of the ground. Poor soil
conditions, such as sand, will require larger footers.

Hoover Fence Co. manual cantilever gate kits basically consist of the gate, two roller posts, a latch post, and the hard-
ware: four cantilever rollers, safety roller covers, and a latch for gate*. An automated cantilever gate kit will also include
a basic gate operator package. You will want to review other gate operator controls to suit your application such as key-
pads, card readers, or intercoms for entry. Consider an exit wand, pushbutton, or a loop and detector for exit. Lastly and
most importantly, consider a loop and detector for safety, safety edge and wireless transmitter/ receiver kit, and/or photo-
beam for safety.

*Hardware supplied in Hoover Fence Co.'s kits may vary per size and style. Specifications subject to change without
notice.




 2
Before You Begin:                                                                     Related Images:

 1. Obtain necessary zoning and building permits. There may be local zoning
    or deed restrictions pertaining to height and type of fence and/or gate.
    Check out property line setback requirements. Find surveyors pins if the
    fence is to be located near property lines or have the lot surveyed.

 2. Measure fence footage and locate gate placement.
                                                                                        6’H x 20’W Single Gate
 3. Call before you dig. Notify your local or state utilities protection service to
    locate potential buried utilities. There is usually no charge to locate
    utilities, however a hefty charge could exisit for repairing buried utility
    lines, not to mention a potential injury to yourself.

 4. Purchase fence, gates, and hardware direct from HooverFence.Com:




                                                                                        6’H x 30’W Double Gate




                                                                                        6’H x 18’W Single Gate




                                                                                        6’H x 20’W Single Gate




                                                                                                                 3
Step 1: Receiving Your Products                                                           Related Images:
    Check to make sure you have received the proper parts within 5 days of receiving
    your Hoover Fence Co. cantilever gate kit using your packing list enclosed with
    your shipment and a copy of your order.

Step 2: Layout
    Drive two wooden or steel stakes into the ground to be used to attach string line
     to (Fig. A). Drive stakes a foot or two away from where you want gate posts to be
     located; this will allow you to drill/ dig holes without obstructions. It may also
    allow you to 'drop' the string line while excavating holes. Be careful not to bump      Cantilever gates are normally
                                                                                             shipped on a flat bed truck.
    or move stakes.                                                                         Forklift will be useful, but man
                                                                                              power will do. Gates can
                                                                                               be in excess of 500 lbs.




                                               Fig. A
    Stretch masonry guide string tight between these stakes; be sure the string is on
    the same side of each of the stakes when wrapping. This string will represent the
    location of the gate and serve as a guide string as you set posts. Posts will be
    set in concrete 1/8-1/4" from string line even though the gate & latch posts could
    be of differing diameters (Fig. A-1).                                                    Upside Down Paint comes in
                                                                                           handy for marking post positions.
                                                                                             Be sure to account for auger
                                                                                          and post diameters when marking.




                                              Fig. A-1

    The gate hardware is designed to make up the difference and cantilever gate
    latches will compensate for the offset the rollers/ posts cause. Keep in mind,
    once the rollers are mounted the gate will actually slide a few inches on the
    inside of these posts and on the inside of the fence (Fig. A-2). This is several
    inches from the string line.                                                          Check hole location prior to filling
                                                                                             with concrete mix. The hole
                                                                                           should not be centered perfectly
                                                                                           under string line; it should be off-
                                                                                          set slightly so that the post will be
                                                                                          centered in the concrete footer. If
                                                                                          necessary put post in empty hole
                                                                                           and check with a level. The post
                                                                                          should be plumb to the string with
                                                                                          approximately 1/8”-1/4” clearance.

                                              Fig. A-2


    Make sure the masonry string is tight and free of obstructions. Adjust stakes and
    string line if necessary. If you remove the string to excavate holes, take care to
    restretch the string line back the way it was prior to removing.




4
Step 3: Setting Posts:                                                                       Related Images:
   Cantilever gates typically require three posts which make them unique; two are
   used to mount the rollers and gate and a third is required as a latch post. The two
   roller posts will be the same size and typically larger than the latch post.
   Important: although the latch post is smaller in diameter, you will set it in concrete
   the same distance from your guide string as the roller posts. The cantilever latch
   makes up for the offset once the gate is installed. Cantilever gates only have
   chain link stretched on the 'opening' portion of the gate. The portion of the gate             Measuring Wheel
   which is stretched with chain link is typically 6" more than the 'opening' to provide
   security where the rollers will offset the gate. The counterbalance is not stretched
   with chain link as it is typically behind the rest of the fence. Set your gate posts
   according to the 'opening' size of the gate you've ordered. In example, a 20' wide
   'opening' size gate opening should have exactly 20' from inside to inside of the
   latch post and first roller post Fig A-1. If you must error, error on the small side by
   setting posts too close together. Since the gate overlaps the opening, posts set to
   close together will not make much difference.                                               Measuring Tape - Large




                                                                               Fig. A-1
                                                                                               Measuring Tape - Small




                                                                              Fig. A-2            Sledge Hammer

   Cantilever gates are large and heavy as are their posts. Consult local building
   practices and codes for proper depth and diameter of holes and concrete foot-
   ings. In general, footers should be three times the diameters of posts installed.
   The depth for fence post footers is often recommended to be 1/3 it's length and
   below frost. You can further anchor posts and concrete footers by digging the
   hole diameter larger at the bottom of the hole compared to the top. This will result
   in a 'bell-shaped' hole in contrast to a 'carrot-shaped' hole.                                  Marking Paint

   For locating placement of the last roller post, you'll need to measure the stretched
   portion of your gate and counterbalance to confirm proper fit Fig. A-3. In general,
   the stretched portion of the cantilever gate is 6" more than the opening to assure
   it overlaps any gaps caused by the offset of the rollers. Hardware varies therefore
   it is always best to take measurements once you receive your gate to plan instal-
   lation.
                                                                                                    Small Auger




                                                                                                    Large Auger




                                                                               Fig. A-3

                                                                                                                        5
Step 3: Setting Posts (cont):                                                                Related Images:




                                                                                               Post Hole Diggers - Large




                                                                                               Post Hole Diggers - Small




    To set gate posts, dig holes 12-30" in diameter and 42-48" deep. The depth and
    diameter of the concrete footers vary depending on your location. The hole size
    above works well in areas with freezing ground. Holes should be "bell-shaped"
    not "carrot-shaped" Fig. B. Next, fill hole(s) with concrete and "stick" the post into
    the wet concrete and plumb post with a level. Make sure your concrete consisten-                   Shovels
    cy is not too wet or soupy. Concrete should be of a plastic-like consistency, dry
    enough so the post will not sink to the bottom of the hole. The gate post should
    NOT extend to the bottom of the hole; there should concrete under the post as
    well as all around it. You will want to leave the concrete level approx. 2-4" below
    grade or the ground level especially in areas which freeze, back fill with dirt.
    Replumb post. When the ground freezes it can cause the concrete footer to
    "heave" if you fill the concrete to the top of the hole. Leave the post(s) alone for           Sledge Hammer
    approx. 24 hours or a sufficient amount of time for the concrete to harden.




                                                                                                        Level




                                                                                                       Spud Bar




6
Step 4: Install Cantilever Rollers & Covers:                                                  Related Images:

   After the concrete has hardened, you may install the two bottom cantilever rollers
   to the two roller posts, one per post, using provided U-bolts. Install the roller on
   the highest grade first if terrain is uneven. Care should be taken that cantilever
   rollers are not installed too low where snow, ice, and freezing ground could
   impede performance. A straight uniform length of tubing, or pipe may be used to
   level the second roller to the first by placing it across the top of the rollers. Firmly
   tighten all nuts on cantilever roller U-Bolts.                                              DAC-5800 Cantilever Roller


   Cantilever gate rollers are available in steel and nylon. Steel or nylon roller covers
   are highly recommended to help protect pinch points.




                                                                                               DAC-5975-B Bottom Cover




   Steel cantilever rollers are available with a grease fitting. Available sizes include        Top View - Roller w/Cover
   3", 4", and 6-5/8". Steel or nylon covers are available.




                                                                                                  Install cantilever roller
                                                                                                   on highest grade first




   Nylon rollers have sealed bearings which do not require maintenance. Nylon
   rollers are available for square and round stock in many different sizes. Steel or             Install second bottom
   nylon covers are available.                                                                       slide gate roller
                                                                                                      level with first




                                                                                                   Tighten bottom gate
                                                                                                      rollers securely




                                                                                                                              7
Step 5: Hang Cantilever Slide Gate:                                                         Related Images:

    Hanging a cantilever gate usually requires a few extra hands. Start by carrying
    slide gate to gate roller posts and lying flat on ground behind roller posts face up.
    Roughly center the entire gate width with the roller posts. With the gate in a hori-
    zontal position, rest bottom rail of gate directly on bottom gate rollers.

    Next, layout top gate rollers and covers. Depending on make, you may be able to
    loosely install gate top rollers and covers near the top of roller posts; this allows         Center gate on bottom
                                                                                                rollers before lifting upright
    you to simply slide gate rollers down and into place once the gate is in the
    upright position. Lift slide gate into the upright position with it's weight centered
    on the roller posts. Hold firmly or attach safety straps to prevent the gate from
    falling. Slide top rollers onto gate frame and tighten U-bolts. Allow 1/4-1/2" space
    between roller and top gate rail to allow for smooth operation and to prevent
    binding.

    Slide gate back and forth a few times to check operation. Make sure cantilever
    gate is free of any binding that could be caused by rollers being installed too tight    Bottom rollers must be level and
    to the gate frame. Check gate for level installation. Check all U-Bolts are securely      securely fastened before lifting
                                                                                               slide gate into upight position
    tightened.




                                                                                            When installing top rollers, allow a
                                                                                            small space of 1/4”-1/2” between
                                                                                              rollers and top gate member




                                                                                                Firmly tighten all nuts to
                                                                                                U-bolts and adjust covers
                                                                                                   to prevent rubbing




8
Step 6: Install Cantilever Slide Gate Latch:                                                Related Images:

    The next step is to install the cantilever slide gate latch. Most cantilever slide
    gate latches are unique in that the 'fork' portion of the latch, or receiver of the
    latch, is installed on the gate latch post, not the gate. The smaller portion of the
    latch is then installed to the leading edge of the slide gate. When the two meet,
    the latch is padlockable. Cantilever gate latches simply install with nuts and bolts.
    Choose and install at a convenient height.
                                                                                                Standard Cantilever
                                                                                                    Gate Latch




                                                                                             Automatic Slide Gate Latch




                                                                                                 Close-up Standard
                                                                                                   Latch Installed




                                                                                                Standard Cantilever
                                                                                                Gate Latch Closed




                                                                                                                          9
 Step 7: Install Operator:                                                                   Related Images:

     The process for installing a slide gate operator varies depending on which make
     and model you will install; carefully read instructions with your gate operator thor-
     oughly before proceeding. Following are some general guidelines that apply to
     most makes of gate operators, however your installation manual will be your
     definitive resource during installation.
                                                                                               Small Slide Gate Operator
     Most slide gate operators will allow for a post mount or pad mount design. Post
     mounted gate operators usually mount to round or square steel posts which are
     embedded in concrete footers below frost. The gate operator is 'sandwiched' by
     these posts and attached with bolts. Most gate operators also allow for a pad
     mount installation which means the gate operator will rest on a concrete pad. In
     either case, the first step is usually to set the gate operator posts or pour the
     pad. Usually the operator will be placed centered between the two roller posts. A
     chain is attached to the leading edge, or latch side of the gate and extends clear
     to the opposite end. Brackets will attach to the uprights of the gate and the chain
     will insert with lock pins.                                                                Post Mounted Operator




                                                                                                 GTO SL-2000B Slide
                                                                                                Gate Operator w/Brake




                                                                                             GTO R4222 Safety Photobeam




10
